The goal of this section of the course is to introduce you to deep learning architectures, and we begin
with the study of a, which is an abbreviation for artificial neural networks.
So in this video I will introduce you to the basic architecture of an Ann, starting with something
called a perceptron.
And as we've progressed through the videos in this section, we will get more and more sophisticated
and we'll learn more and more about these Anns.
So let's begin.
This is a diagram of a formula.
And this is the basic diagram of the perceptron, which is kind of the older name for the precursor
of deep learning networks.
So these bubbles here these circles represent numbers that are inputs into our network.
And this bubble here refers to a mathematical operation that gets applied to these numbers.
So what we see here is that there are three inputs three numbers that we input to the model.
The model implements one computation and it provides a single output.
So three inputs one computation one output.
Now let's make this a little more concrete by attaching some numbers and symbols here.
Okay so here we have three numbers eight five minus four.
These are the numeric inputs into the model.
Here is the computation the mathematical operation that we perform on these three numbers.
So what are we doing.
We are summing the three numbers and then dividing by three.
And that gives some result.
So what is this machine.
What would you call this device here.
Well you know you would call this an averaging machine.
So it takes three numbers.
It adds them together divides by three.
And that's really just literally the definition of averaging.
So this is a graph.
This is a diagram that illustrates how an averaging computation would look like.
Okay let's take this a little bit further and say now this is not doing the averaging on its own.
This is only doing summing.
But we are going to add weights to each of these lines here that connects the input nodes to the computation
node here.
So the weight for each of these lines for each of the inputs is one third.
Now we can write out this graph here using mathematical notation.
So we have eight times one third or eight weighted by one third plus because we're summing here plus
five times or weighted by one third plus minus four weighted by one third okay.
And so then the answer is still three.
We can still call this an averaging machine.
I'm basically just writing it out in a slightly different way compared to the previous slide.
By the way.
Notice what we're doing here with this mathematical operation.
We are saying element wise multiplication.
And then summing up all of the element wise multiplications together.
Okay we're going to I'm going to come back to that point in a moment.
First I want to explore the idea of taking weighted sums of the inputs.
So now what I'm doing is just changing the the weight values.
So this is the same.
This is still just a summation here.
We still have weights one weight per input number.
But I've just changed the numbers now.
Okay.
So this would we can express this mathematically like this.
So it's still the input number times the weight plus the input number times weight plus the input number
times weight.
So and well in this case this is not an averaging machine.
We can call this a weighted averaging machine because we are still computing some kind of an average.
but we are weighting the different inputs according to these little W's over here.
Maybe it would be better to call this a weighted sum compared to weighted average, because the word
average already implies a particular, um, operation.
So let's call let's start calling this a weighted sum.
We are summing up all of these numbers, but we're not summing them directly.
We are waiting them first by some additional numbers here, which I call w.
So now let's get back to this concept of what this operation really means.
So we're taking these three numbers and these three weights and element wise multiplying them and then
summing them together.
And that gives us a single number.
Now I hope that sounds familiar from the uh, a couple sections ago about the math prerequisites, in
particular the lecture for the dot product.
In fact, what we are doing here is computing the dot product between a vector x that is the inputs
And a vector w that contains the weights.
So we can write this out as.
The output of the model is a value y.
We call this variable y and it just equals the dot product between x the vector of inputs, and w the
vector of weights.
So x transpose w that is the dot product.
And that is literally what this machine is doing.
Now this is a linear operation with animation because it's a pretty important concept.
This is a linear operation that we are implementing here.
So let me talk for a moment about linear and nonlinear operations.
A linear operation just means that you are doing addition and scalar multiplication.
So if your mathematical operation simply involves addition and scalar multiplication, then it's a linear
operation.
And anything else is basically nonlinear.
So linear means addition and multiplication.
You could draw straight lines through the output, and non-linear is anything else where you don't have
straight lines, you don't have just addition and multiplication.
This issue of linear versus non-linear is going to come up fairly often in the next couple sections,
in particular later videos.
In this section, I'm going to show you examples of linear problems and non-linear problems, linear
solutions or I should say linear models and non-linear models.
And I'll discuss why we need linear models for linear problems.
You'll see examples of this and so on.
But for now, suffice it to say that linear models can only solve linearly separable problems.
Linearly separable problems are problems where you can achieve the result by drawing a straight line
through the two different groups.
I'll show an example of this on the next slide.
So linear models are actually not very good at solving Non-linearly separable problems, so non-linear
models can solve more complex problems.
Linear models can only solve linearly separable problems.
This also means that you shouldn't use a linear model for a nonlinear problem, and you also, as it
turns out, shouldn't use a non-linear model for a linear problem.
Now, linear models are what you come across in a standards course on statistics and machine learning.
Things like regression, general linear models, Anova.
These are all factor analysis.
These are all examples of linear models.
Now linear models are really great.
And there are lots and lots of linearly separable problems in the universe.
And we use linear models for them.
Any kind of general variant of a general linear model.
But there are also many problems that cannot be solved through linear models.
And that's why we need nonlinear operations in our deep learning models.
And then also the second part of the statement.
Not to use a nonlinear model for a linear problem.
I will also show an example of this in in a video later on in this section.
Essentially, the idea is that if you use a nonlinear model, the added complexity generally just makes
things more complicated.
A linear solution is going to be a better fit for a linear problem.
Okay.
So now I'm going to change this model slightly.
This part is still exactly the same.
We take the inputs scalar multiplied by weights sum them together.
This is the dot product operation.
This is linear.
But then instead of directly going to the output I'm going to pass this operation.
The output of this summation into another function which is the sine function or the signum function.
So it's often abbreviated as SN.
And this outputs the signum function outputs one for any positive numbers and minus one for any negative
numbers.
Now the signum function is a non-linear function, so it doesn't actually it doesn't really matter for
the signum function.
It doesn't really matter what these different values are.
All that matters is whether they are all of them together are greater than zero or less than zero.
So here is an example where I changed the plus eight to a minus eight.
So all of these weights are the same.
These two numbers are the same.
I just changed the sign of the input here eight.
Now that changes this function here.
Again it doesn't actually matter what this arithmetic ends up being.
All that matters for this signum function is whether this number here is positive or negative.
Now in this case it's negative.
So that ends up being a minus one.
This arithmetic here does not work out to minus one.
But the output of the signum function is minus one.
So here you can see a graph of what this sine function looks like.
So the output is either minus one or plus one depending on the sine of the input.
Now this is a nonlinear function because we cannot draw a single line that passes through this entire
function.
It is non linear.
Now this is a very simple nonlinear function.
It turns out that this simple function is actually not terribly useful for applications in deep learning.
And that's really just because it has such a limited bandwidth that only allows for two unique values
of the output.
Nonetheless, this is a really simple nonlinear function to illustrate for our purposes here, of introducing
you to the idea of computing a linear weighted sum of inputs and passing that value through some nonlinear
function.
So the perceptron has a linear operation and then that gets passed through a non-linear operation.
We can write that again like this.
So we take the dot product between the input numbers and the weight vector that is this part in here
this is a linear operation.
And then I pass that linear operation through an a non-linear function.
And that gives us the output of the model which here I'm referring to as y hat.
Now I wanted to use this signum function.
Just to give you a concrete example.
Generally we just call this sigma to indicate that it is some kind of nonlinear function.
There are in deep learning, there are maybe dozens of uh, of, of these kinds of non-linear functions,
although most of the time people just use a relatively small number like let's say 2 or 3 of these functions.
Later on, we're going to start calling this an activation function.
But for now, don't worry about the terminology.
Suffice it to say that we have a linear part and a nonlinear part.
And in fact, this equation is so beautiful.
It's so simple.
I'm going to make it like huge on this screen because this is really important.
This is much of the math of deep learning is literally just this one equation, not all of it.
Of course there is error functions and loss functions.
Backpropagation.
The math gets a little bit hairy, but a lot of the math of deep learning is literally just this.
So let's walk through this.
This is the output of a node of a network of a deep learning network.
Here we have the dot product.
This is a linear weighted sum.
So again it's just the multiplication of the input values times their corresponding weights.
And then we sum all of those together.
This is a linear operation.
And this result gets passed through this uh this other function here which is a nonlinear Non-linear
function.
It's commonly called an activation function, but it just has some non-linearity built into it.
Now there's one extra piece to the perceptron, to the basic unit of the Ann that I haven't yet told
you about.
And that little piece is called the bias term.
If you have a statistics background, if you've taken a statistics course, the bias term is also called
an intercept.
It's exactly the same thing as an intercept in a general linear model or a regression.
Okay.
So to introduce you to the to or to motivate why we need a bias term, I want you to draw a line.
Draw a straight line that separates the green dots from the blue dots.
Now obviously this is a really simple problem.
In fact, this is an example of a linearly separable problem.
This is a linearly separable problem because we can draw a straight line that perfectly separates the
two populations of colors here.
Okay, how about here?
Is it still possible to draw a line that separates these two colors?
Now, I know you're thinking that this is really trivial because the answer is yeah, of course.
You just draw a line through here.
But what if I said that that line must pass through the origin of the graph.
So here's the origin.
This dot here.
So the line that best separates these two groups of dots must pass through the origin.
Well you know that line is going to go like this.
And this is the best we can possibly do.
It's actually not so bad.
We're still getting, you know, the majority of the blue dots on this side, the majority of the green
dots on this side.
But obviously this is not the optimal solution.
Now why do we have to confine this line to go through the origin.
Well this is what the model looks like if we do not include a bias term.
So instead we want to include a bias term in the model and the bias term, or the intercept basically
allows the line to go off the origin, not to pass through the origin.
And then having a bias term gives us the opportunity to draw separating hyperplanes or lines that can
pass through the y axis anywhere.
They don't need to pass through the origin.
Okay, so this model has no bias term.
This model has a bias term or an intercept.
Now do you always need to have a bias term.
Well you don't necessarily always need a bias term.
You can actually transform the data to be mean centered.
So you can mean center the data, subtract the mean from the data along all dimensions, and then you're
still going to be okay.
You're still going to have the the separating line pass through the origin.
However this is not really something we want to rely on.
So instead we just always add a bias term.
Now why is this the case mathematically?
Where does the bias term come up mathematically?
Well this line here can be represented as y equals mx.
So m is the slope of the line and x is the x axis and y is the y axis.
So if this is our formula then when x equals zero y must also equal zero.
It doesn't matter what m is m can be any possible value.
And as long as x equals zero y must also equal zero.
So this equation must or any line that's define any model that's characterized by this equation must
go through the origin the 00..
Okay.
So then we can what we do is we add this B term here.
So this is the bias also called the intercept term in statistics.
So now this is a very familiar looking equation.
Of course you know this from middle school.
y equals mx plus b.
So now we can set x to be zero.
And and then y equals b when x is zero.
So now you know in this plot let's say b equals you know I don't know numbers on here.
But let's just say this is five.
So now when x equals zero y equals b.
And we set that to be five.
So we need the bias term in the model in order to avoid having this kind of an awkward situation where
we are going to get a suboptimal result simply because the line is constrained to pass through the origin.
So this is why we need a bias term.
Now, I mentioned here, you know, if you mean center everything, you can get away without a bias
term.
But this is this is more for like academic elucidation.
In practice you always include a bias term.
Fortunately, when we start working with PyTorch, you will see that including the bias term is the
default procedure in PyTorch, so you don't really have to worry about adding it explicitly.
It is important, however, to know that it exists and why we need it.
Okay, so that means that the graph our graph actually looks something like this.
We have our input numbers and the bias term here.
And these all feed into the operation or the computation node over here.
So then mathematically it's you know this is what I drew before.
This is what I wrote out before.
In fact it looks more like this.
So we have all of the input values.
These are the numbers the inputs to the model.
And we have their corresponding weights.
And then we have one extra set here we have an extra term for the bias and then for the weight of the
bias.
Now the thing is we can set this bias to be any value we want.
And this w zero is going to be a parameter that the model optimizes.
So because these are just two constants that are multiplying each other.
Then in practice, what we do is we just set the bias term to be one, which means implicitly we drop
it out of the equation.
So implicitly we we the bias gets removed and we just have this w0.
Again we need this w0.
This is a bias or intercept term that allows us to fit any arbitrary data positioned anywhere in the
plane.
So in this video, I introduced you to the basic architecture of an artificial neural network and something
called the perceptron.
In the next video, I'm going to provide another perspective on exactly this same model architecture,
this basic architecture.
That'll be a geometric perspective.
And from there we will start learning about the math of artificial neural networks.
And then the rest of this section is going to be lots and lots of examples in PyTorch.